Ameca is a robotic humanoid created in 2021 by Engineered Arts, headquarters in Falmouth, Cornwall, United Kingdom. The project commenced in February 2021, and the first public demonstration was at the CES 2022 show in Las Vegas. Ameca's appearance features grey rubber skin on the face and hands, and is specifically designed to appear genderless.
In 2024, an Ameca unit was installed in Edinburgh in the UK to reside at the National Robotarium. 
Ameca generation 3 has been released and showcased at ICRA 2025 along with Ami.

History
The first generation of Ameca was developed at Engineered Arts headquarters in Falmouth, Cornwall, United Kingdom. The project started in February 2021, with the first video revealed publicly on 1 December 2021. Ameca gained widespread attention on Twitter and TikTok ahead of its first public demonstration at the Consumer Electronics Show 2022, where it was covered by CNET and other news outlets.
In 2022, Ameca presented an Alternative Christmas message by British TV Channel 4 for Christmas Day. Ameca was associated with the Museum of the Future's robotic family, where it could interact with visitors. In 2024, an Ameca unit was installed in Edinburgh in the UK to reside at the National Robotarium.

Features
It is designed as a platform for further developing robotics technologies involving human-robot interaction. utilizes embedded microphones, binocular eye mounted cameras, a chest camera and facial recognition software to interact with the public. Interactions can be governed by either OpenAI's GPT-3 or human telepresence. It also features articulated motorized arms, fingers, neck and facial features. 
Ameca's appearance features grey rubber skin on the face and hands, and is specifically designed to appear genderless.

Public appearances
Computer History Museum, California
Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum, Paderborn, Germany
Copernicus Science Center, Warsaw, Poland
Museum of the Future, Dubai
Consumer Electronics Show 2022
Deutsches Museum Nuremberg
OMR Festival 2022 Hosted by Vodafone
GITEX 2022
International Conference on Robotics and Automation 2023
International Telecommunication Union AI for Good Global Summit 2023
Sphere (Not Ameca, Custom humanoid named Aura built on Ameca technology)


== References ==