Maysoun Ibrahim (Arabic: ميسون إبراهيم) is a Palestinian scholar and technology strategist. She is the founding president of the Palestinian Syndicate for Information Sciences and Technology - PALIST. She is a Palestinian scholar and technology strategist known for her work in digital transformation, innovation policy, and smart sustainable cities. 
Ibrahim holds a PhD in Information Technology for Development and is the author of the book, titled Smart Sustainable Cities: Transformation towards Future Cities, that is recognized as the first of its kind in the field of Smart and Sustainable Cities to be written by an Arabic woman.
She has played a leading role in advancing the information and communication technology (ICT) sector and promoting innovation-driven development in the Arab region. Her work focuses on harnessing emerging technologies to support sustainable growth, knowledge economies, and social inclusion. Her work and research focus on harnessing emerging technologies to support urban development, sustainability, resilience, knowledge economies, gender equality and social inclusion in the Arab world.
Ibrahim is known for her contributions to national and regional digital strategies, transformation frameworks, and policies that link technology with economic urban resilience, sustainable development, Smart and Sustainable Cities, and Artificial Intelligence.

Early life and education
Ibrahim holds a PhD in Information Technology for Development, with a research focus on Smart Sustainable Cities—an area that connects digital innovation with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Information about her early life and undergraduate studies has not been publicly shared.

Career
Over the course of her career, Ibrahim has worked across government institutions, academia, and the private sector. She has been involved in shaping national strategies for digital transformation, innovation, and public-sector modernization in Palestine and the wider Arab region.
1. National roles
Ibrahim is the Founding President of the Palestinian Syndicate for Information Sciences and Technology (PALIST) (2021–present). She serves on the Management Board of the Palestinian Business and Professional Women (BPW) and a member of the International Business and Professional Women (BPW).  
Ibrahim is a board member of the Higher Council for Innovation and Excellence (HCIE) in Palestine and chairs both its Experimental Incubation Committee and the National Innovation Supporters Network. In 2019, she chaired the National Forum on the Fourth Industrial Revolution, a platform that explored emerging technologies and their role in economic and social development. 
She contributed to several national projects and initiatives related to the Ministry of Telecommunications and Digital Economy of Palestine, including e-government transformation strategy and project, digital transformation strategy, national Cybersecurity policy, national Artificial Intelligence Strategy, national innovation strategy, among others.
2. Academic roles
In higher education, Ibrahim serves on the Board of Trustees of the Arab American University of Palestine (AAUP) and is the vice-chair of its National Digital Transformation and Artificial Intelligence Center. She is a member of the Scientific Research Council under the Palestinian Ministry of Education and Higher Education and serves as the Chair of the Committee on Scientific Research and Artificial Intelligence Ethics in Higher Education affiliated with the Council. She acted as a member of the Management Board and Senate of the Euro-Mediterranean University of Slovenia (EMUNI). 
3. International and Regional roles
Ibrahim acted as a consultant to UN-ESCWA. She authored UN-ESCWA, UN-Habitat and UN-DESA reports and presentations, including studies on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), smart sustainable cities, urban development, digital transformation for urban resilience and public institutions, innovation and gender equality in the Arab region. 
Her work with regional and international organizations, especially the United Nations (UN) organizations and the Union for Mediterranean (UfM), has helped shape regional strategies in digital transformation, urban resilience, sustainability, use of emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, and innovation across several Arab countries.

Positions
President, Palestinian Syndicate for Information Science and Technology - PALIST (2021–present).
President of the Founding Committee, Palestinian Syndicate for Information Sciences and Technology - PALIST (2018-2021).
Board Member, Palestinian International Cooperation Agency - PICA (2024–present).
Vice Chair, National Center for Digital Transformation and Artificial Intelligence, AAUP (2023–present).
Trustee, Arab American University of Palestine - AAUP (2020–present).
Board member of the National Council on Scientific Research (2025 - present).
Chair of the Committee on Research Ethics and Artificial Intelligence Ethics, National Council for Scientific Research (2025 - present).
Board Member & Trustee, Euro-Mediterranean University in Slovenia (2020–2024).
Consultant & reviewer, UN-ESCWA (2018–present).
Board Member, Higher Council for Innovation and Excellence - HCIE (2018–present).
Chair, Experimental Incubation Committee of the Higher Council for Innovation and Excellence - HCIE (2021-present).
Chair, National Innovation Supporters Network - HCIE (2022-present).
Chair, Preparatory Committee of the 4th National Forum on the Fourth Industrial Revolution (2019).
Jury Member, L'Oréal-UNESCO Women in Science Award (2019).
Member, Technical Committee, UN-ESCWA Technology Center (2019–2021).
Jury, Hult Prize (2018–2022).
Judge, Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing (2013–2018).
Peer reviewer for international journals including IEEE Xplore and Sustainable Cities and Society.
Delivered sessions at UC Berkeley, Rice University, NYU Abu Dhabi, Portsmouth University, and more.

Academic work
Ibrahim’s academic research focuses on digital transformation frameworks, smart sustainable cities transformation processes, economic urban resilience, sustainable urban development, and science, technology and innovation diplomacy. Her work also explores how emerging technologies can enhance public institutional services through data-driven and people-centered solutions, fostering innovation and Responsiveness, Inclusiveness, Trustworthiness, and Effectiveness (RITE) governance. She has published extensively in highly ranked international journals. 
She published the book titled: “Smart Sustainable Cities: Transformation towards Future Cities”, which is the first of it kind being published by an Arab women  in this field of study. Her peer-reviewed article ‘Smart sustainable cities roadmap: Readiness for transformation towards urban sustainability’ appears in Sustainable Cities and Society  and is widely cited in the SSC literature. She also developed a ‘Theory of Change’ model for Smart Sustainable Cities, which is one of the earliest theoretical models on the topic.
Ibrahim contributed chapters to international books on the Fourth Industrial Revolution, smart sustainable cities, and science, technology, and innovation diplomacy. In addition to her publications, she serves as a reviewer and a member of program committees for leading international research conferences and journals. Ibrahim has delivered academic webinars and in-person seminars at universities across the Arab region and globally, including UC Berkeley Future X (USA), Rice University (USA), University of Portsmouth (UK), EMUNI University (Slovenia), New York University Abu Dhabi (UAE), Beirut Arab University (Lebanon), EUROMED University of Fes (Morocco), among others.

Awards and recognition
Ibrahim has received several awards recognizing her contributions to research, innovation, and the empowerment of women in science and technology. 
In addition to her achievements, she has served as a jury and evaluation committee member for several prominent international and regional initiatives, including, but not limited to: 

L’Oréal–UNESCO For Women in Science Awards.
Taawon Youth Award.
Hult Prize.
Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in computing.

Selected publications
Ibrahim M. (2020). Smart Sustainable Cities: Transformation Towards Future Cities (Book).
"Science, Technology and Innovation Diplomacy in the Arab Region with Emphasis on the State of Palestine" (Book chapter).
"The Fourth Industrial Revolution and Smart Cities in the Time of COVID-19" (Book chapter).
UN-ESCWA report and presentations, such as:
Leveraging emerging technology and innovation for enhancing public institutions in the Arab region. 
Smart sustainable cities and smart digital solutions for urban resilience in the Arab region Lessons from the pandemic. 
Fourth Industrial Revolution: Impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on Development in the Arab region.
Information and Communication Technologies: Prospects for Promoting Gender Equality in the Arab Region.
Digital Transformation in Palestine - The Future City of Rawabi.
Science and Technology Parks In Arab Countries with a focus on the State of Palestine.
Ibrahim, M., El-Zaart, A., & Adams, C. (2018). Smart sustainable cities roadmap: Readiness for transformation towards urban sustainability. Sustainable Cities and Society.
Ibrahim, M., Adam, C., & El-Zaart, A. (2015). Paving the way to Smart Sustainable Cities: Transformation Models and Challenges. Journal of Information Systems and Technology Management, 12(3), 559–576.
M. Ibrahim, A. El-Zaart and C. Adams, "Theory of change for the transformation towards smart sustainable cities," 2017 Sensors Networks Smart and Emerging Technologies (SENSET), Beiriut, Lebanon, 2017, 1-4.
•	Several peer-reviewed journal articles and conference papers on smart sustainable cities, ICT4D, and public innovation.


== References ==