Singularity studies is an interdisciplinary academic field which examines the idea of technological singularity — the hypothesised point at which artificial intelligence may surpass human intelligence, might be attained by artificial intelligence (AI), robotics, and other technologies and sciences, and its social impacts.
In this academic field, the study and research are conducted across a broad array of terrains such as information science, robotics, social informatics, economics, philosophy, and ethics. The primary aim of the singularity studies is to gain an integrative understanding of the transformation of social systems occurring in tandem with the explosive evolution of AI and also the changes to be effected by such transformation in the view of humans, ethics, and legal systems.

History
An academic work on technological singurality has appeared in computer science, philosophy, sociology, and law since the early 1990s. 
Early discussions of an intelligence explosion were popularised by science-fiction writer Vernor Vinge in 1993 and later systematised by futurist Ray Kurzweil. Since the 2010s, universities such as Oxford, Stanford, and Keio have established dedicated programmes, while peer-reviewed journals have begun to publish scenario analyses and policy studies. Ongoing debates question the predictive value of singularity scenarios and warn against a deterministic view of technology.

Characteristics of research
Singularity studies extends beyond mere future predictions and offer an intellectual foundation for proactively designing and creating a desirable future. Principal research themes in this realm include:

Ethics of AI;
Social implications of technologies;
Possibility of harmonious coexistence of humans and AI;
Communication with AI; and
Redesign of social systems.

Technologists and academics
Vernor Vinge: Propounded the concept of singularity in 1993, making a massive impact on the academic and science-fiction spheres.
Ray Kurzweil: Predicted the advent around 2045 of the technological singularity in his 2005 book The Singularity Is Near.
Nick Bostrom: Offered philosophical reflections on superintelligence and the risks posed by AI. He is the founding director of the now-dissolved Future of Humanity Institute at the University of Oxford.

Japan
Kento Sasano: A social informatician, AI educator, and inventor. He is the president of the Japan Society of Singularity Studies.

Challenges and outlook
Singularity studies is still evolving as an academic field, and quite a few challenges remain unresolved in regard to the systematization of their theories, research methods, and educational curricula. That said, in this day and age of accelerating technological and societal
shifts, interdisciplinary approaches have gained in importance and are drawing much attention in the arenas of scholarly research, intercorporate collaboration, and policy planning.

See also
Artificial general intelligence – Type of AI with wide-ranging abilities
Futures studies – Study of postulating possible, probable, and preferable futures
Singularitarianism – Belief in an incipient technological singularity
Superintelligence – Hypothetical agent surpassing human intelligence

References
Further reading
Kurzweil, Ray (2005). The Singularity Is Near. New York, New York: Penguin Group. ISBN 9780715635612.
Bostrom, Nick (2002), "Existential Risks", Journal of Evolution and Technology, 9, archived from the original on 2011-04-27, retrieved 2007-08-07
Good, I. J. (1965), "Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine", in Franz L. Alt; Morris Rubinoff (eds.), Advances in Computers Volume 6 (PDF), vol. 6, Academic Press, pp. 31–88, doi:10.1016/S0065-2458(08)60418-0, hdl:10919/89424, ISBN 9780120121069, archived from the original on 2001-05-27, retrieved 2007-08-07
Marcus, Gary, "Am I Human?: Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind",Scientific American, vol. 316, no. 3 (March 2017), pp. 58–63. Multiple tests of artificial-intelligence efficacy are needed because, "just as there is no single test of athletic prowess, there cannot be one ultimate test of intelligence." One such test, a "Construction Challenge", would test perception and physical action—"two important elements of intelligent behavior that were entirely absent from the original Turing test." Another proposal has been to give machines the same standardized tests of science and other disciplines that schoolchildren take. A so far insuperable stumbling block to artificial intelligence is an incapacity for reliable disambiguation. "[V]irtually every sentence [that people generate] is ambiguous, often in multiple ways." A prominent example is known as the "pronoun disambiguation problem": a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentence—such as "he", "she" or "it"—refers.

External links
"Singularity University of Singularity Group". Singularity Group. Retrieved 2025-02-11.
"Japan Society of Singularity Studies". Japan Society of Singularity Studies. Retrieved 2025-01-26.
Intelligence Explosion FAQ by the Machine Intelligence Research Institute
The Coming Technological Singularity:How to Survive in the Post-Human Era (on Vernor Vinge's web site, retrieved Jul 2019)